---
id: 61
title: Shaders
date: 2015-04-07T08:46:56+00:00
author: Thierry CANTENOT
excerpt: A brief overview of the solutions I found to have a flexible shader system and to limit the shader combinatory explosion in my engine.
guid: http://45.55.161.212/?p=61
permalink: /2015/04/07/shaders/
categories:
  - GLSL
  - Programming
tags:
  - Conception
  - Engine
  - Programming
---
<p style="text-align: justify;">
  A brief overview of the solutions I found to have a flexible shader system and to limit the shader combinatory explosion in my engine.<br /> <!--more-->
</p>

<h2 style="text-align: justify;">
  Includes
</h2>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  When I started to write some shaders, I found myself copy-pasting code from other shaders I previously wrote. Then I thought that GLSL would have a <em>#include </em>directive in order to avoid code duplication. But at my surprise, there wasn&#8217;t. Looking around in the Internet, I found various discussions debating the pros and the cons of having such kind of preprocessing system. But the fact remained that it wasn&#8217;t there. So I decided, as many others did, to &#8220;extend&#8221; the GLSL language by adding a <em>#include</em> directive and preprocess my shaders before compiling them. That way it was easier to create a small library with reusable functions or types, and to refactor code when needed.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <h2 style="text-align: justify;">
    Ubershaders
  </h2>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    Another problem I faced while writing shaders was the combination of material characteristics (some models used one texture and others not) and the combination of effects. Several options were available:
  </p>
  
  <ul style="text-align: justify;">
    <li>
      <strong>dynamic branching</strong> based on uniforms resulting in a great number of <em>if-else</em> dynamic branching instructions. All the code is one file (or several with the includes) and different configurations are handled via dynamic branching. However, dynamic branching in shaders, often times, kills performance so it was not a viable option.
    </li>
    <li>
      <strong>write all the permutations</strong> in different shader files and load them for each type of material/effect. The main problem of this approach is its scalability: the more parameters one adds, the more shaders one needs to maintain (combinatory explosion).
    </li>
    <li>
      <strong>static branching </strong>based on preprocessor directives. Similar to the dynamic branching approach without the run-time overhead caused by branching. Once again, this relies on a preprocessing of the shader beforehand. I chose this option for my engine.
    </li>
    <li>
      &#8230;
    </li>
  </ul>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    It usually goes like this:
  </p>
  
  <pre class="font:consolas toolbar-overlay:false show-lang:2 lang:c decode:true">#ifndef DIFFUSE_MAPPING
#define DIFFUSE_MAPPING 0
#endif

void main()
{
    vec4 diffuse = uDiffuseColor;

    #if DIFFUSE_MAPPING
    diffuse *= texture(uDiffuseMap, vTexCoord.xy);
    #endif

     ...
}</pre>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    When preprocessing the shader, one should prepend the defines to the shader code in order to enable/disable some part of it.
  </p>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    I decided to slightly deviate from this and created a new preprocessor directive <em>#uberdefine</em>. This directive allows you to declare the &#8220;uberdefines&#8221; used in the shader along with their default value. With this, it is easier in the preprocessing step to retrieve the existing defines and build a cache with the different shader permutations. The cache keeps only the requested shader permutations and does not load all of them in one go so resources are not wasted. When one want to get a version of the shader, he just have to provide the list of &#8220;uberdefines&#8221; to use, and if a &#8220;uberdefine&#8221; is not in the list, the associated default value is used to build the shader.
  </p>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    Here how a &#8220;ubershader&#8221; might look like:
  </p>
  
  <pre class="font:consolas toolbar-overlay:false show-lang:2 lang:c decode:true ">#include "core/light.glsl"

#uberdefine DIFFUSE_MAPPING 0
#uberdefine NORMAL_MAPPING 0
#uberdefine FLIP_UVS 1

...

void main()
{
    #if DIFFUSE_MAPPING
    ...
    #endif

    #if NORMAL_MAPPING
    ...
    #else
    ...
    #endif

    ...
}</pre>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    This approach is better performance-wise compared to the dynamic branching, easier to maintain (the code is in one place), flexible and modular (<em>#include</em>). It only requires a bit of preprocessing when loading the shader.
  </p>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    I believe more (and better) approaches exist but this one solved most of my issues. If you are curious, you can look around the web and find different interesting methods to solve the combinatory and flexibility issues, and find the one that suits your need ;-)!
  </p>
  
  <p style="text-align: justify;">
    <h2 style="text-align: justify;">
      Auto-reload
    </h2>
    
    <p style="text-align: justify;">
      It can be really cumbersome to implement and debug shader code, especially when you have to relaunch your program at every changes. So I implemented in my resource system an <em>hot reload </em>functionnality so that if a resource file or one of its dependencies is modified, the shader is recompiled and reloaded automatically. It the compilation and the linkage fails for some reasons, a rollback to the previous version is performed to avoid further issues (it actually depends on a <em>reload policy</em>).
    </p>
    
    <p style="text-align: justify;">
      <h2 style="text-align: justify;">
        Further improvements
      </h2>
      
      <h3 style="text-align: justify;">
        For loop unrolling
      </h3>
      
      <p style="text-align: justify;">
        A feature I might add in the future in my shader is loop unrolling during the preprocessing step.
      </p>
      
      <p style="text-align: justify;">
        A loop to unroll would have the following syntax:
      </p>
      
      <pre class="font:consolas toolbar-overlay:false show-lang:2 lang:c decode:true">#for(i : 0, 3)
v += values[${i}] * (${i} + 1);
...
#endfor</pre>
      
      <p style="text-align: justify;">
        This would be unroll into 4 blocks of code where the variable<em> ${i}</em> is substituted with the indices of the loop:
      </p>
      
      <pre class="font:consolas toolbar-overlay:false show-lang:2 lang:c++ decode:true">v += values[0] * (0 + 1):
...

v += values[1] * (1 + 1):
...

v += values[2] * (2 + 1):
...</pre>
      
      <p style="text-align: justify;">
        Or it would be able to generate functions
      </p>
      
      <pre class="lang:c decode:true ">#for(i : 0, 6)
vec4 XXXLayered${i}(in vec3 input)
{
   float sample = SAMPLES[${i}];
    ...
}
#endfor</pre>
      
      <p style="text-align: justify;">
        <p style="text-align: justify;">
          This could be useful to generate<em> potentially</em> faster code (I say potentially because the compiler might be able to perform loop unrolling by itself). Anyway, it is just an idea for now :-).
        </p>
        
        <h3 style="text-align: justify;">
          Import
        </h3>
        
        <p style="text-align: justify;">
          Instead of using #include, create a #import similar to the one in python. It would be then possible to only import one or several functions from a file instead of the whole file, we might be faster to parse and compile (note: the GLSL compiler performs dead code removal so the size of the final binary might not change).
        </p>
        
        <pre class="lang:c decode:true">#import linearizeDepth from utils
#import pi from math
#import tonemapUncharted from tonemaps
#import fresnelSchlick from fresnel</pre>
        
        <p style="text-align: justify;">